Pokemon Legendary Analysis - Feature Extraction

Christian Rodriguez
crodriguez0874@gmail.com
07/10/19

In Feature_Extraction.py, we try multiple dimension reduction methods on the 
base stats of the pokemon (HP, Attack, Sp. Attack, Defense, Sp. Defense, Speed)
to project the data into spaces where it is more linearly seperable. The
methods implemented are PCA, polynomial-kernal PCA, RBF-kernal PCA,
Cosine-kernal PCA, and Isomap. 6 dimensions is certainly not too much to work
with, but there may be some structure in the data that can be pronounced via
PCA and non-linear projections.

Prior to applying the dimension reduction methods, we made sure to standardize
the data via min-max (x_i - min(x)/max(x)). The distributions of base stats
can be pretty different when comparing them to one another. For PCA and the
kernal PCAs, we plotted a variation of screeplots (displays the percentage of
variance by using up to the nth component), a projecting of the data in 2
dimensions, and a projection of the data in 3 dimensions. Also, the parameters
for each dimension reduction method was chosen via grid search and observing
which set of parameters best results in the data being linearly seperable in 
3 dimensions. Through graphics alone, the projections are really interesting!
It does not look like the data is perfectly linearly separated, but the data
takes on interesting geometrics shapes for each projection. I believe they are
all worthwhile to consider as potential predictors. The sets of features worth
considering in lieu of the original set of base stats features are:
    
* Total Aggregation - Add up all six base stats into one variable.

* Offensive/Defensive Aggregation - Add up HP, Defense, and Sp. Defense into 
one feature, and add up Attack, Sp. Attack, and Speed into another.
    
* PCA - The first 3 PC components.

* Polynomial-Kernal PCA - The first 3 PC components.

* RBF-Kernal PCA - The first 25 PC components.

* Cosine-Kernal PCA - The first 4 PC components.

*** The number of components chosen to use for PCA and the kernal PCAs was
determined by observing the elbow in the screeplot (approximate point
where the local maximum of variation explained). ***

* Isomap - Use the first 3 dimensions from the isomapping.

The outline for the rest of the analysis will be as follows:

1) Create the different sets of features. From the sets describes before,
we should have 8 (the 7 listed before, and +1 for the original data) data
sets.

2) Create a validation set, where the data sets' validation sets
have the same observations but different features.

3) For each data set, tune the best predictor on the data.

4) Compare the best predictors for each data set, and choose
the most accurate predictor.

Step 1) will be the next milestone (predictions prepartion), and the rest
will be lumped into the predictions milestone. Please incorporate some
automation to ensure we are not doing the same work over and over. Also,
make sure to scale the test data using the maximums/minimums from the 
training data. Next, should do some prediction preparation where we for
each set of features.

Generally, all our prediction models will include: [set of base stats features]
+ [height & weight] + [gender]. As we observed in the EDA, legendary pokemon
tend to be genderless. So, gender will most likely be a powerful predictor for
our models. Therefore, we will only consider models that accept factor features
as predictors. We could also try to think of more feature extraction methods for
type, weaknesses, moveset, or even a text analysis for the description of a
pokemon, but that is excessive considering our analysis will not have a significant
impact (outside of its inquisitive nature). 